Harvard
Business
Review

Analytics

What Data Scientists Really Do,
According to 35 Data Scientists

by Hugo Bowne-Anderson

August 15, 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

burakpekakcan/Getty Images

Summary. What do data scientists do? According to interviews with more than 30
data scientists, data science is about infrastructure, testing, using machine
learning for decision making, and data products. Data science is being used in
numerous fields, but it’s not all about deep learning or the search for artificial

general intelligence. In fact, the skills needed include communication and
storytelling. But data science is becoming more specialized, and with that the skills
data scientists need are evolving. In addition, ethics is becoming a bigger and

bigger challenge. close

Modern data science emerged in tech, from optimizing Google search
rankings and LinkedIn recommendations to influencing the headlines
Buzzfeed editors run. But it’s poised to transform all sectors, from
retail, telecommunications, and agriculture to health, trucking, and
the penal system. Yet the terms “data science” and “data scientist”
aren’t always easily understood, and are used to describe a wide range

of data-related work.

What, exactly, is it that data scientists do? As the host of the
DataCamp podcast DataFramed, I have had the pleasure of speaking
with over 30 data scientists across a wide array of industries and
academic disciplines. Among other things, I’ve asked them about

what their jobs entail.

It’s true that data science is a varied field. The data scientists I’ve
interviewed approach our conversations from many angles. They
describe a wide range of work, including the massive online
experimental frameworks for product development at booking.com
and Etsy, the methods Buzzfeed uses to implement a multi-armed
bandit solution for headline optimization, and the impact machine
learning has on business decisions at Airbnb. That last example came
during my conversation with Airbnb data scientist Robert Chang.
When Chang was at Twitter, that company was focused on growth.
Now that he’s at Airbnb, Chang works on productionized machine-
learning models. Data science can be used in a number of different
ways, depending not just on the industry but on the business and its

goals.

But despite all the variety, a number of themes have emerged from

these conversations. Here’s what they are:
What data scientists do. We now know how data science works, at
least in the tech industry. First, data scientists lay a solid data
foundation in order to perform robust analytics. Then they use online
experiments, among other methods, to achieve sustainable growth.
Finally, they build machine learning pipelines and personalized data
products to better understand their business and customers and to
make better decisions. In other words, in tech, data science is about
infrastructure, testing, machine learning for decision making, and

data products.

Great strides are being made in industries other than tech. I
spoke with Ben Skrainka, a data scientist at Convoy, about how that
company is leveraging data science to revolutionize the North
American trucking industry. Sandy Griffith of Flatiron Health told us
about the impact data science has begun to have on cancer research.
Drew Conway and I discussed his company Alluvium, which “uses
machine learning and artificial intelligence to turn massive data
streams produced by industrial operations into insights.” Mike Tamir,
now head of self-driving at Uber, discussed working with Takt to
facilitate Fortune 500 companies’ leveraging data science, including
his work on Starbucks’ recommendation systems. This non-
exhaustive list illustrates data-science revolutions across a multitude

of verticals.

It isn’t all just the promise of self-driving cars and artificial
general intelligence. Many of my guests are skeptical not only of the
fetishization of artificial general intelligence by the mainstream media
(including headlines such as VentureBeat’s “An AI god will emerge by
2042 and write its own bible. Will you worship it?”), but also of the
buzz around machine learning and deep learning. Sure, machine
learning and deep learning are powerful techniques with important
applications, but, as with all buzz terms, a healthy skepticism is in
order. Nearly all of my guests understand that working data scientists
make their daily bread and butter through data collection and data
cleaning; building dashboards and reports; data visualization;
statistical inference; communicating results to key stakeholders; and

convincing decision makers of their results.
The skills data scientists need are evolving (and experience with
deep learning isn’t the most important one). In a conversation
with Jonathan Nolis, a data science leader in the Seattle area who
helps Fortune 500 companies, we posed the question, “Which skill is
more important for a data scientist: the ability to use the most
sophisticated deep learning models, or the ability to make good
PowerPoint slides?” He made a case for the latter, since

communicating results remains a critical part of data work.

Another recurring theme is that these skills, so necessary today, are
likely to change on a relatively short timescale. As we're seeing rapid
developments in both the open-source ecosystem of tools available to
do data science and in the commercial, productized data-science
tools, we’re also seeing increasing automation of a lot of data-science
drudgery, such as data cleaning and data preparation. It has been a
common trope that 80% of a data scientist’s valuable time is spent
simply finding, cleaning, and organizing data, leaving only 20% to

actually perform analysis.

But this is unlikely to last. These days even a great deal of machine
learning and deep learning is being automated, as we learned when
we dedicated an episode to automated machine learning, and heard
from Randal Olson, lead data scientist at Life Epigenetics.

One result of this rapid change is that the vast majority of my guests
tell us that the key skills for data scientists are not the abilities to
build and use deep-learning infrastructures. Instead they are the
abilities to learn on the fly and to communicate well in order to
answer business questions, explaining complex results to
nontechnical stakeholders. Aspiring data scientists, then, should
focus less on techniques than on questions. New techniques come and
go, but critical thinking and quantitative, domain-specific skills will

remain in demand.

Specialization is becoming more important. While there is no
well-defined career path for data scientists, and little support for

junior data scientists, we are starting to see some forms of
specialization. Emily Robinson described the difference between Type
A and Type B data scientists: “Type A is the analysis — sort of a
traditional statistician — and Type B is building machine learning

models.”

Jonathan Nolis breaks data science down into three components: (1)
business intelligence, which is essentially about “taking data that the
company has and getting it in front of the right people” in the form of
dashboards, reports, and emails; (2) decision science, which is about
“taking data and using it to help a company make a decision”; and (3)
machine learning, which is about “how can we take data science
models and put them continuously into production.” Although many
working data scientists are currently generalists and do all three, we
are seeing distinct career paths emerging, as in the case of machine

learning engineers.

Ethics is among the field’s biggest challenges. You may gather that
the profession offers its practitioners a great deal of uncertainty.
When I asked Hilary Mason in our first episode if any other major
challenges face the data science community, she said, “Do you think
that imprecise ethics, no standards of practice, and a lack of

consistent vocabulary are not enough challenges for us today?”

All three are essential points, and the first two in particular are front
of mind for nearly every DataFramed guest. At a time when so many
of our interactions with the world are dictated by algorithms
developed by data scientists, what role does ethics play? As Omoju
Miller, the senior machine learning data scientist at GitHub, said in

our interview:
We need to have that ethical understanding, we need to have
that training, and we need to have something akin to a
Hippocratic oath. And we need to actually have proper licenses
so that if you actually do something unethical, perhaps you have
some kind of penalty, or disbarment, or some kind of recourse,
something to say this is not what we want to do as an industry,
and then figure out ways to remediate people who go off the
rails and do things because people just aren’t trained and they

don’t know.

A recurring theme is the serious, harmful, and unethical
consequences that data science can have, such as the COMPAS
Recidivism Risk Score that has been “used across the country to
predict future criminals” and is “biased against blacks,” according to

ProPublica.

We're approaching a consensus that ethical standards need to come
from within data science itself, as well as from legislators, grassroots
movements, and other stakeholders. Part of this movement involves a
reemphasis on interpretability in models, as opposed to black-box
models. That is, we need to build models that can explain why they
make the predictions they make. Deep learning models are great at a
lot of things, but they are infamously uninterpretable. Many
dedicated, intelligent researchers, developers, and data scientists are

making headway here with work such as Lime, a project aimed

 

at explaining what machine learning models are doing.

The data science revolution across industries and society at large has
just begun. Whether the title of data scientist will remain the “sexiest
job of the 21st century,” will become more specialized, or will become
a set of skills that most working professionals are simply required to
have is unclear. As Hilary Mason told me: “Will we even have data
science in 10 years? I remember a world where we didn’t, and it

wouldn’t surprise me if the title goes the way of ‘webmaster.”
HB

Hugo Bowne-Anderson, Ph.D., is a data scientist
and educator at DataCamp, as well as the host of
the podcast “DataFramed.” @hugobowne
